Added README for ONNX Frontend (#13325)
openvinotoolkit/openvino: src/frontends/onnx/README.md

# ONNX FE

> The main responsibility of ONNX Frontend is importing ONNX models and conversion them to the `ov::Model` representation. 

Reviewer: Either 'importing and converting' or 'import of and conversion of'.
Rather use 'these' while referring to non-living matter.
My choice would be 'import of ONNX models and conversion of these into the ...'

> The main responsibility of ONNX Frontend is importing ONNX models and conversion them to the `ov::Model` representation. 

Author: applied @t-jankowski suggestions - "is import of ONNX models and conversion of these into the..". Does it work for you?

> To capabilities of ONNX Frontend belong also:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other capabilities of ONNX Frontend:
```

Author: done

> To capabilities of ONNX Frontend belong also:

Author: done

* modification of tensors properties (like data type and shapes)
* changing topology of the models (like cutting subgraphs, inserting additional inputs and outputs)
* user-friendly searching the models (via tensors and operators names)

> The component is written in `C++`, but `Python` bindings are also available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The component is written in `C++`, `Python` bindings are also available.
```

Author: done

> Each change to ONNX FE component requires `clang-format` code style and `NCC` naming style checks.

Author: done

## Key contacts

In case of any questions, review and merge requests, please contact:
* Tomasz Dołbniak (tomdol)
* Mateusz Tabaka (mateusztabaka)
* Mateusz Bencer (mbencer)

from `openvino-onnx-frontend-maintainers` maintainers group.

## Components

ONNX Frontend implements an interface common for all frontends defined in [Frontends API](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/src/frontends/common/include/openvino/frontend).

> The exported symbols are decorated with `ONNX_FRONTEND_API` flag. The key class responsible for importing is `FrontEnd` defined in (ONNX Frontend class)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/openvino/frontend/onnx/frontend.hpp].

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence should be "prefixed" with an explanation that ONNX FE is a (shared) library.
```suggestion
The exported symbols are decorated with `ONNX_FRONTEND_API` macro. The key class responsible for importing is `FrontEnd` defined in (ONNX Frontend class)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/openvino/frontend/onnx/frontend.hpp].
```

Reviewer 2: BTW I'm not sure I understand "The key class responsible for importing is `FrontEnd`" - can you rephrase it?

Author: I wanted to say like "the heart of the ONNX FE ecosystem if Frontend class", but now I'm thinking that it is rather useless info for user/contributor so I've removed this sentence.

> For backward compatibility reasons, the ONNX importer API (more lower-level abstraction approach) is still maintained. It can be found in (ONNX Importer)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/onnx_import/onnx.hpp]. The symbols of ONNX Importer API are decorated with `ONNX_IMPORTER_API` macro.

Reviewer 3: It is low level details, I think it can be described on dedicated page inside the docs folder.
The idea is to don't overload user by information about the product, here we can have links to dedicated pages and he will read in case of needed.

Author: I see, I've removed some details (like exporting flags), but still keep some very basic info about op registering (to consider when tutorial - how to add a new op will be ready)

Reviewer 3: Can we do this page now? :)
I added documentation for IR frontend: https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/ir/README.md

Maybe you can also take a look to this page. Here we don't provide any details on  the main page, for details dedicated pages are created

Author: done, dedicated page (TBD - 93001) created, details in the main page removed

> The crucial place in ONNX Frontend is the directory where the operators are implemented:[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/op]. Each operator handler has to be registered in ops bridge - (ops bridge)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/ops_bridge.cpp]. Expect that ONNX frontend has capabilities to register a custom op by a user. It can be achieved via `ConversionExtension` available in (Conversion)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/openvino/frontend/onnx/extension/conversion.hpp].

Reviewer 3: These links don't render well.

Author: good catch, fixed

> The crucial place in ONNX Frontend is (ops implementation folder)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/op], where the operators are implemented. Each built-in operator has to be registered in ops bridge - (ops bridge)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/ops_bridge.cpp]. Expect that, ONNX frontend gives capabilities to register a custom op by an user. It can be achieved via `ConversionExtension` available in (Conversion)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/openvino/frontend/onnx/extension/conversion.hpp].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The crucial place in ONNX Frontend is the directory where the operators are implemented:[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/op]. Each operator handler has to be registered in ops bridge - (ops bridge)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/ops_bridge.cpp]. Expect that ONNX frontend has capabilities to register a custom op by a user. It can be achieved via `ConversionExtension` available in (Conversion)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/openvino/frontend/onnx/extension/conversion.hpp].
```

Author: done

> API of ONNX Frontend can be called directly, but it is also used internally by (Model Optimizer)[https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/tools/mo] during ONNX to IR (Intermediate Representation) conversion. What's more capabilities of ONNX Frontend are used by ONNX Runtime via OpenVINO Execution Provider (more information can be found in (docs)[https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/build/eps.html#openvino]).

Reviewer 3: Please use relative paths. It will allow to have a branch independent documentation.

ONNX Frontend is tested in few places:
- [C++ gtest-based tests](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/src/frontends/onnx/tests)
- [Python frontend tests](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/src/bindings/python/tests/test_frontend)
- [Python operators tests](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/src/bindings/python/tests/test_onnx)
- [Python compliance with ONNX standard tests](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/bindings/python/tests/test_onnx/test_backend.py)

> - [Python OpenModelZoo tests](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/bindings/python/tests/test_onnx/test_zoo_models.py)

Reviewer 3: I think for tests we can have a dedicated page

Author: move to the tests tutorial

## Architecture
The overview of components responsible for importing scenario is shown on the diagram below:

> ![ONNX overview diagram](docs/img/onnx_fe_overview.png)

Author: done

## Tutorials

> TBD

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* How to add new operation
* How to test
* How to debug
* ...
```

Author: done

## See also

>  * [ONNX standard repository](https://github.com/onnx/onnx)

Author: done

 * [ONNX operators list](https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/main/docs/Operators.md)

>  * [ONNX Runtime OpenVINO Provider](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/tree/cccbe90764616749f06633fadaf90aba2eb360c9/onnxruntime/core/providers/openvino)

Author: good catch, changed to master

The API of ONNX Frontend can be called directly. It is also used internally by [Model Optimizer](../../../tools/mo) during the conversion from ONNX to Intermediate Representation (IR). The capabilities of ONNX Frontend are used by the [ONNX Runtime via OpenVINO Execution Provider](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/build/eps.html#openvino).

Both `C++` and `Python` tests are implemented for the ONNX Frontend. Read the [ONNX Frontend tests](./docs/tests.md#onnx-frontend-testing-places) page for more details. 

## Architecture
The diagram below shows an overview of the components responsible for the basic model importing flow:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    onnx[("ONNX (*.onnx)")]
    ov_model[("OV Model")]

    subgraph InputModel["ov::frontend::onnx::InputModel"]
    end

    subgraph Frontend["ov::frontend::onnx::FrontEnd"]
        fe_load["load_impl()"]
        fe_convert["convert()"]
    end

    style onnx fill:#6c9f7f
    style ov_model fill:#6c9f7f

    onnx-->|protobuf|fe_load
    fe_load-->InputModel
    InputModel-->fe_convert
    fe_convert-->ov_model
```

> Find more details about the architecture in the [ONNX Frontend architecture](./docs/architecture.md) document.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Find more details in the [ONNX Frontend architecture](./docs/architecture.md) document.
```

# OpenVINO ONNX Frontend

The main responsibility of the ONNX Frontend is to import ONNX models and convert them into the `ov::Model` representation. 
Other capabilities of the ONNX Frontend:
* modification of tensors properties (like data type and shapes)
* changing topology of the models (like cutting subgraphs, inserting additional inputs and outputs)
* searching the models in a user-friendly way via tensors and operators names

> The component is written in `C++`. `Python` bindings are also available.

Reviewer 3: What do you mean: "`Python` bindings are also available."? If I remember right we don't have ONNX Frontend specific objects in python (excepts the extension)

Author: I mean here common FE API bindigs here, but you are right, that it can be confused. Removed.

If you want to contribute, please follow [the common coding style rules](../../../docs/dev/coding_style.md).

## Key contacts

> In case of any questions, review and merge requests, please contact [openvino-onnx-frontend-maintainers](https://github.com/orgs/openvinotoolkit/teams/openvino-onnx-frontend-maintainers) group.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In case of any questions, review and merge requests, contact the [openvino-onnx-frontend-maintainers](https://github.com/orgs/openvinotoolkit/teams/openvino-onnx-frontend-maintainers) group.
```

## Components

> ONNX Frontend implements an interface common for all frontends defined in [Frontends API](./src/frontends/common/include/openvino/frontend).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ONNX Frontend implements an interface common to all frontends defined in the [Frontends API](./src/frontends/common/include/openvino/frontend).
```

> For backward compatibility reasons, the ONNX importer API (more lower-level abstraction approach) is still maintained. It can be found in [ONNX Importer](.src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/onnx_import/onnx.hpp).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For backward compatibility reasons, the ONNX importer API (more lower-level abstraction approach) is still maintained. You can find it in the [ONNX Importer](.src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/onnx_import/onnx.hpp).
```

> For backward compatibility reasons, the ONNX importer API (more lower-level abstraction approach) is still maintained. It can be found in [ONNX Importer](.src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/onnx_import/onnx.hpp).

Reviewer 4: Links don't work

Author: fixed

> Read [How to add a new operation](./docs/how_to_add_op.md) page for more information on adding new operations to the ONNX Frontend and extending the existing ones. 

Reviewer 3: This sentence is not about components, maybe we shouldn't duplicate it here and keep only in the tutorials section.

Author: removed

> The information about adding new operations to ONNX Frontend (both contribution and extension scenario) can be found in [How to add an new operation](./docs/how_to_add_op.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Read [How to add a new operation](./docs/how_to_add_op.md) page for more information on adding new operations to the ONNX Frontend and extending the existing ones. 
```

> The API of ONNX Frontend can be called directly, but it is also used internally by [Model Optimizer](../../../tools/mo) during ONNX to IR (Intermediate Representation) conversion. What's more capabilities of ONNX Frontend are used by [ONNX Runtime via OpenVINO Execution Provider](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/build/eps.html#openvino).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The API of ONNX Frontend can be called directly. It is also used internally by [Model Optimizer](../../../tools/mo) during the conversion from ONNX to Intermediate Representation (IR). The capabilities of ONNX Frontend are used by the [ONNX Runtime via OpenVINO Execution Provider](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/build/eps.html#openvino).
```

> Both `C++` and `Python` tests are implemented for the ONNX Frontend. Read the [ONNX Frontend tests](./docs/tests.md#places) page for more details. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both `C++` and `Python` tests are implemented for the ONNX Frontend. Read the [ONNX Frontend tests](./docs/tests.md#onnx-frontend-testing-places) page for more details. 
```
If I remember right it also should work

Author: right, it works, done

> ONNX Frontend is tested in many places (both `C++` and `Python` tests). More details about testing you can find in [ONNX FE tests](./docs/tests#places)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Both `C++` and `Python` tests are implemented for the ONNX Frontend. Read the [ONNX Frontend tests](./docs/tests#places) page for more details. 
```

> ONNX Frontend is tested in many places (both `C++` and `Python` tests). More details about testing you can find in [ONNX FE tests](./docs/tests#places)

Reviewer 4: link doesn't work

Author: fixed

## Architecture

> The overview of components responsible for the basic flow which is a model importing is shown on the diagram below:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The diagram below shows an overview of the components responsible for the basic model importing flow:
```

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    onnx[("ONNX (*.onnx)")]
    ov_model[("OV Model")]

    subgraph InputModel["ov::frontend::onnx::InputModel"]
    end

    subgraph Frontend["ov::frontend::onnx::FrontEnd"]
        fe_load["load_impl()"]
        fe_convert["convert()"]
    end

    style onnx fill:#6c9f7f
    style ov_model fill:#6c9f7f

    onnx-->|protobuf|fe_load
    fe_load-->InputModel
    InputModel-->fe_convert
    fe_convert-->ov_model
```

> More details about architecture can be found in [ONNX Frontend architecture](./docs/architecture.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Find more details about the architecture in the [ONNX Frontend architecture](./docs/architecture.md) document.
```

## Tutorials

> * [How to add an new operation](./docs/how_to_add_op.md)
> * [How ONNX FE is tested](./docs/tests.md)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* [How to add a new operation](./docs/how_to_add_op.md)
* [How ONNX Frontend is tested](./docs/tests.md)
```

# OpenVINO ONNX Frontend

The main responsibility of ONNX Frontend is import of ONNX models and conversion of these into the `ov::Model` representation. 
Other capabilities of the ONNX Frontend:
* modification of tensors properties (like data type and shapes)
* changing topology of the models (like cutting subgraphs, inserting additional inputs and outputs)
* user-friendly searching the models (via tensors and operators names)

The component is written in `C++`, `Python` bindings are also available.
If you want to contribute, please follow [the common coding style rules](../../../docs/dev/coding_style.md).

## Key contacts

In case of any questions, review and merge requests, please contact [openvino-onnx-frontend-maintainers](https://github.com/orgs/openvinotoolkit/teams/openvino-onnx-frontend-maintainers) group.

## Components

ONNX Frontend implements an interface common for all frontends defined in [Frontends API](./src/frontends/common/include/openvino/frontend).
For backward compatibility reasons, the ONNX importer API (more lower-level abstraction approach) is still maintained. It can be found in [ONNX Importer](.src/frontends/onnx/frontend/include/onnx_import/onnx.hpp).

> The crucial place in ONNX Frontend is [the directory](.src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/op) where the operators are implemented. Each operator handler has to be registered in [ops bridge](.src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/ops_bridge.cpp). More details about it you can find in [How to add an new operation](./docs/how_to_add_op.md). Expect that ONNX frontend has capabilities to register a custom op by a user. It can be achieved via [ConversionExtension](.include/openvino/frontend/onnx/extension/conversion.hpp).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The crucial place in ONNX Frontend is [the directory](./src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/op) where the operators are implemented. Each operator handler has to be registered in [ops bridge](./src/frontends/onnx/frontend/src/ops_bridge.cpp). More details about it you can find in [How to add an new operation](./docs/how_to_add_op.md). Expect that ONNX frontend has capabilities to register a custom op by a user. It can be achieved via [ConversionExtension](./include/openvino/frontend/onnx/extension/conversion.hpp).
```

> API of ONNX Frontend can be called directly, but it is also used internally by [Model Optimizer](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/tree/master/tools/mo) during ONNX to IR (Intermediate Representation) conversion. What's more capabilities of ONNX Frontend are used by [ONNX Runtime via OpenVINO Execution Provider](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/build/eps.html#openvino).

Reviewer 3: Please use relative links

```suggestion
API of ONNX Frontend can be called directly, but it is also used internally by [Model Optimizer](../../../tools/mo) during ONNX to IR (Intermediate Representation) conversion. What's more capabilities of ONNX Frontend are used by [ONNX Runtime via OpenVINO Execution Provider](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/build/eps.html#openvino).
```

ONNX Frontend is tested in many places (both `C++` and `Python` tests). More details about testing you can find in [ONNX FE tests](./docs/tests#places)

## Architecture
The overview of components responsible for the basic flow which is a model importing is shown on the diagram below:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    onnx[("ONNX (*.onnx)")]
    ov_model[("OV Model")]

    subgraph InputModel
        get_place["get_place_by_tensor_name"]
        set_tensor_name["set_name_for_tensor"]
        others["..."]
        set_pt_shape["set_partial_shape"]
        add_output["add_output"]
        extract_sub["extract_subgraph"]
    end

    subgraph Frontend
        fe_load["load_impl"]
        fe_convert["convert"]

>         fe_others["..."]

Reviewer 3: Why do we need all these methods? 
Maybe we can show only used methods like here: https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/src/frontends/ir/docs/architecture.md

Or maybe we can create a separate document for architecture and say more words about different classes and their usage?

Author: I wanted to show editing capabilities of ONNX Frontend, which are not exposed enough in my opinion. But agree, that class diagram in a separate document is better here - ticket 93001
